So what we're going to do
now is take a step back
and evaluate the
pros and the cons
of our
SearchWithParallelSpliterator
example.
So there's a number of benefits.
Probably the most
obvious one is how
the application of a
parallel Spliterator
can help to transparently
improve program performance.
Of course, transparently
is a relative term,
as we'll see here in a second.
Basically, if you take a look
at the performance results
that we get from running
this on my quad-core laptop
with 32 gigs of RAM, we can see
that the parallel Spliterator
implementation is
the fastest one.
And it's faster than the
parallel streams version.
Now, it's not
ridiculously faster.
It's by no means faster than
the parallel streams version
relative to the
parallel streams version
being faster than the
sequential streams version,
but it is faster.
And the interesting
thing you can also see
is if you run the same test--
same program-- on
my quad-core MacBook
Pro, you see some other
interesting results.
So once again, parallel
Spliterator is faster,
but parallel streams is
also very fast as well.
And it's interesting, because
in the version on my Windows
machine, my Lenovo, the
completable futures versions
are very fast.
Whereas on the MacBook Pro, the
completable futures versions
are not as fast--
relatively speaking-- as the
parallel streams version.
And I kind of scratch
my head trying
to figure out why that
might be the case,
and I think it comes down to the
fact that on the MacBook Pro,
I only have 16 gigabytes of RAM.
Whereas on the Lenovo laptop,
I have 32 gigabytes of RAM.
So maybe there's some reason
why completable futures
with smaller amounts of memory
doesn't perform as well.
Could have to do, perhaps,
with processor cache
affinity issues,
or who knows what.
But perhaps as you
have more memory,
than maybe the completable
future stuff runs faster.
It's actually a little
bit hard to tell.
I would be somewhat
careful trying
to take these results too far.
But it is instructive
to show that we
get different behaviors in
different runtime environments.
And the thing that
comes across here
is that the parallel
completable version that we just
talked about performs the best.
Now, why does it
perform the best?
Well, the reason
it performs better
is because the granularity
of parallelism is finer.
And what I mean by that is
the parallel Spliterator
version, as we saw, has
three degrees of parallelism.
It processes each work of
Shakespeare in parallel.
It processes each phrase we're
searching for in each input
string in parallel.
And it also splits
up the input string--
the work of Shakespeare--
into chunks,
and processes those
things in parallel
to search for the phrases.
So as a result, we
have more opportunities
to leverage available cores.
In fact, you wouldn't
be surprised--
I probably should have
run this benchmark
with my six-core laptop, just
to see what happened there.
But I suspect that that
would be even more scalable,
because we'd have more
cores at our disposal.
And we would probably
expect that a version
of this implementation
that was able to break up
the granularity
of parallelization
to be smaller and
smaller would work better
the more cores that we have.
I can see that I need to go out
and buy an octo-core processor
soon and try to run these
experiments again, because it'd
be fun to see if you really
do continue to see basically
linear or superlinear
scale-ups as the number
of cores increase.
At some point you run into other
boundaries, other blockers,
and other impediments
to speed up--
like memory
bandwidth and so on--
but seems to work pretty well
for quad-core and six-core
processors.
So the bottom line is we
get these nice speed-ups
because we're able to process
the code that we wrote--
the instructions-- at a
finer level of detail.
This example also
illustrates the differences
between using sequential
and parallel Spliterators,
and how deciding to choose
between parallel or sequential
is really very simple.
The changes are very minuscule.
So as you can see
here, all we did
is we had this search
for phrase method
that was parameterized
by a Boolean that said,
do I want to run
in parallel or not?
And then depending
on what was passed
in there from the
process input method,
the call to StreamSupport.stream
PhraseMatchSpliterator
will end up either running
sequentially or in parallel.
And that's really the beauty
of the streams framework.
They provide these cool classes
like StreamSupport.stream,
which will
"automagically" create
for you sequential
or parallel streams
at just the flick of a switch.
And that's very, very cool.
And you sure as heck would not
want to try to write that code
yourself.
I'm very certain it's
complicated code, and probably
not very well-documented.
So if you try to read it,
your mind will explode,
and so on and so forth.
Now, here's the tricky
part-- and we'll
talk about this in just a second
when we talk about the cons.
It obviously took
non-trivial time and effort
to create the
PhraseMatchSpliterator.
So even though it was easy
to get the streams framework
to use that Spliterator
to run in parallel
or to run sequentially,
making that Spliterator
work properly--
that took some serious thought.
So let's now go
ahead and talk about
the
SearchWithParallelSpliterator
class cons--
the downsides, the drawbacks--
because, of course,
it's not all unicorns
and rainbows.
So the main issue to think
about here, the key point
to come away with is, is that
the parallel-related portions
of PhraseMatchSpliterator
are much more complicated
to program than the
sequential-related portions.
Writing the code to do
tryAdvance was really simple.
All we had to do was
figure out if there
was a regular
expression match or not.
If there was not, we just
returned false, bail out.
If there was a
match, we figured out
where the match started,
created a new result object
to encapsulate that
match, and then
gave that back to
the stream framework
through the consumer action
that basically gives you
pass-by reference semantics.
So that was really simple.
And that worked quite nicely for
our SearchWithParallelStreams
implementation.
The
SearchWithParallelSpliterator
implementation, of course, had
to go that one step further,
and it required us to
implement the trySplit method.
And as you can see, there's
a lot of moving parts here.
There was trying to figure out
where the start position could
be by taking a guess, updating
the split position to reflect
various properties,
and then that
would involve, essentially,
readjusting the split
position if it would have been
placed in such a way where
the phrase wouldn't
match because we split
the input incorrectly
and we split the phrase
across input
boundaries, and so on.
And then finally, we had to
write the splitInput method
itself, which took the
corrected splitPos,
and then broke things
up into two chunks.
The breaking up into two chunks
is fairly simple, although even
there, if you go back and
look at the splitInput method,
you'll see how we had to
make some interesting design
choices.
We decided to use
care sequences,
for example, to make
the splitting as
efficient as possible, rather
than using substr from a string
or substring, where you end up
basically splitting a string
and copying its data, because
string splitting is more
expensive than character
sequence splitting--
and so on and so forth.
So there were lots of
subtle design issues.
But quite frankly, by far,
the most complicated part
of the code was
the part that did
the tryToUpdateSplitPos logic.
That's very subtle, creating
this subset of the total space
and using a regular
expression matcher
in that to see if we split
the string in the wrong place.
That actually took me
a while to get right.
And in fact, when I first wrote
this code, it wasn't correct.
It didn't work properly.
And so I ended up eventually
having someone point
out the fact that it
didn't work properly,
and so I went back and wrote
a bunch of and JUnit tests.
Probably should've written
the JUnit test first.
And I wrote the JUnit
test to make sure
that the code was
splitting things properly,
not splitting across boundaries.
And now, of course,
once the tests
are written, as
is always the case
with wonderful
test-driven development,
my code henceforth can be
enhanced and maintained
and modified, and I should
have better confidence
that I haven't broken
anything in some horrible way.
So ironically, it
actually turned out
that writing the
parallel Spliterator
took longer than writing
the rest of the program.
So doing the other parts of
the logic were really simple,
but I really had to sit
down and scratch my head
to get the
PhraseMatchSpliterator's
trySplit method
to work properly.
Now, having said all that,
it's important to remember
that the reason why
this trySplit method was
so complicated was
because we were using it
for a very advanced scenario.
We were trying to take
a large piece of text--
a work of Shakespeare--
and then be able to
split it up into chunks
to search it in parallel.
Most uses of Spliterators
and parallel Spliterators,
in practice, are nowhere
near this complicated.
So this is kind of a
worst-case scenario that really
demonstrates the black
belt-level expertise needed
to get this stuff to work.
If you take a look at a
lot of the Spliterators
that you'll find in the
Java collections framework--
especially things like the
ArrayList Spliterator--
it's really straightforward.
It's just classic
divide and conquer--
pick a midpoint,
split things in half,
call yourself recursively,
find another midpoint
in each of those
halves, split that
in half, and so
you keep going down
and down and down, until you
get to some atomic-sized value
at the end.
So you shouldn't come away
from this lesson being
intimidated by the complexity of
writing parallel Spliterators.
Most of them are
really quite simple.
Of course, it also
depends on the complexity
of your data structure.
So if you remember
our discussion
about ArrayList
versus LinkedList,
the LinkedList trySplit
method is kind of complicated,
because they're trying to
be somewhat clever about how
to split a data structure that
is inherently not easily split
evenly and efficiently.
So it's probably
arguably more complicated
than it needs to be, but
obviously some smart person
spent a lot of time looking
about the different design
alternatives.
The good news is, for the
bulk of the collections
you're going to use for
your parallel streams,
they've already got the
Spliterators implemented
for you, so you don't
have to worry about having
to implement them yourselves.
So it's only for
special cases like this,
where we're trying to do some
special user-defined data
structure-- like our work of
Shakespeare, for example--
where you'd ever
run across the need
to do parallel Spliterators.
But now that you've seen it, you
should be well-equipped to be
able to tackle these
things in practise.